New discovery leading the way in genome editing

23 August 2017



In 1866 Gregor Mendel, an Austrian monk, published his work on breeding pea plants, giving birth to the diverse field of genetics and inheritance that we have today. It was a while later that the idea developed of a code hidden inside each cell of an organism, passed on from parents to children, defining characteristics and behaviour of the organism. This genetic code or genome is made of a substance called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which is a long molecule containing a unique code. But can we edit the genome to remove unwanted characteristics or add desirable ones? The family of proteins that are able to “cut” DNA were discovered in the 1960s, but it was only recently in 2005 that we gained the ability to precisely target a section of the DNA to be cut, giving life to the field of genome editing.

So how does DNA work? DNA is found inside cells, and consists of two long parallel strands connected by pairs of molecules called bases, named A,C,G and T, whose sequence and ordering form the unique genetic code for the individual cell or organism. The complete set of DNA molecules within the cell makes up the organism's genome, which can help determine height, eye colour, susceptibility to certain diseases, etc. This code must be interpreted by the cell for it to be able to perform functions necessary to survive. How is this done? A specific type of protein that can “read” the DNA travels along reading each base and producing a copy. This process is known as transcription, much like writing down the coded message. Elsewhere in the cell, the code is decrypted and then the instructions in the message are followed to make a protein. Proteins perform all the processes within the cell. The term gene is used for a DNA sequence used to produce a protein.

Several genome editing techniques exist, they require both a part that cuts the DNA and a part that targets the cut to be in a specific place. Different procedures e.g. TALENs, ZFNs, CRISPR-Cas9, use different cutting and target methods, which can be used to insert or remove DNA. The earlier methods, ZFNs (2005)  and TALENs (2011), are more costly and time consuming to engineer, limiting their widespread use. However, in 2013 the CRISPR-Cas9 system, having been originally discovered in bacteria to destroy invading viruses, was successfully adapted for gene editing in cells of organisms. Since then, the CRISPR-Cas9 method has caused a lot of excitement as it is versatile, inexpensive, very efficient and easy to use with no highly specialised knowledge necessary. It can also target multiple places on the genome in a single procedure. The CRISPR-Cas9 technique is now the cheapest and most efficient genome editing method, allowing an increase of the rate and amount of research possible in the future.

Does this mean we can control any genetic characteristic of an organism? No. These procedures only allow editing of the genome, we cannot control the multitude of other factors that are necessary for a certain outcome, e.g. cell environment, interaction with other proteins in the cell, etc. Also, only in very few cases is a single gene is responsible for a single feature of an organism, for example in agriculture farmers have performed genetic editing on their cows so they do not have horns, which is possible as there is one gene responsible for whether cows have horns. However, for most features, like height or intelligence, the link back to the genes is significantly more complicated. In these cases, without having a good understanding the connection it is almost impossible to control the outcome. 

Having said this, there are some genetic conditions that are the result of the defect of a single gene, for example cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anaemia and Huntington's disease. As these diseases are relatively simple and well understood, genetic editing here is very promising. The gene editing technique CRISPR was tested in humans for the first time in a clinical trial starting in November 2016 by a Chinese group at Sichuan University. The technique was used on patients with aggressive lung cancer by disabling the gene for a protein that suppresses the cell’s immune response thus allowing the cancer to take advantage. There have been many more clinical trials using CRISPR since then starting up in the US and China. The easier and more efficient CRISPR technique appears to have accelerated the push to use gene editing in clinics. Gene editing could also have significant implications in other fields such as agriculture and biotechnology. For example, in February 2017, CRISPR-Cas9 was used for the first time to successfully produce cows with increased resistance to bovine tuberculosis. In this case the technology was used to insert a tuberculosis resistance gene into the cow genome.

Genome editing has an extremely wide range of applications, and since the discovery of the easy, cheap and efficient CRISPR-Cas9 technology in 2013 the field has significantly expanded. Genetics research, medicine, agriculture and biotechnology are just a few fields that are benefiting from genome editing. Such a busy, active area will continue to provide breakthroughs that will benefit individuals and society, but not without ethical dilemmas along the way.
