Graphene: an exciting new material - but is is worth the hype?

2 November 2017

Carbon an extremely abundant element and is essential to life as we know it. The element can take on various forms including coal for fuel, graphite in pencils and diamond jewellery. It’s strange to think that a lump of coal is made of exactly the same stuff as a diamond ring, the only difference is the structure at very small scales. Clearly the arrangement of the atoms in a material has an enormous effect on its properties. A new form of carbon, with a different structure, has now emerged with unbelievable properties: graphene. Although originally observed in 1962 it is only recently in 2004 that graphene was isolated and its composition, structure and properties investigated. This work by Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov at the University of Manchester sparked an explosion of interest in the material and won the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics.

What is so amazing about graphene? Firstly it is a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice, like honeycomb - the material is one atom thick! The structure of this 2D material makes it extremely strong, flexible, almost completely transparent, extremely light and a great conductor of electricity and heat. It is the strongest material ever discovered (more than 100 times stronger than steel) and is almost completely transparent, transmitting 97.7% of light. It is very light; if you covered a football field with graphene (one atom thick) it would weight less than a gram. It is better at conducting heat than any other material and is an excellent conductor of electricity. 

Why are we not already exploiting the benefits of this astonishing material? Well, as you might expect there are difficulties when dealing with a material that is only an atom thick. Producing graphene is not straightforward, and once produced you can’t just pick it up and move it around. Back in 2004, Geim and Novoselov produced graphene by putting a piece of Scotch tape on a chunk of graphite and pulling off a thin layer. After many, many attempts you get an atom thick layer of graphene - probably not as high tech as you were expecting. Since 2004 there has been a lot of research into ways of being able to mass-produce graphene with no defects easily and cheaply. Alternative methods are continuously being developed, which is promising for future research into the properties and applications of graphene.

One of the most exciting possible uses of graphene its use in electronics. Electricity is related to the movement electrons, the easier electrons can move through the material the better it is at conducting electricity. The hexagonal lattice of graphene allows electrons to move very quickly and freely though the material. This makes it very promising for a future transistor, which would be faster and more powerful. What is a transistor? Transistors were first built in 1948 and have revolutionised technology since, providing the building blocks for almost all modern electronic devices including mobile phones and computers. Current transistors are devices made out of silicon that can control the flow of charge and are able to act as a switch for electronic signals. 

In recent years many breakthroughs have demonstrated the possibility of using graphene-based transistors instead of the current silicon-based ones. In June 2017, scientists from the University of Central Florida found that graphene-based transistors could be a thousand times faster, as well as being smaller and substantially more efficient. The research into graphene-based transistors is just beginning and while there have been breakthroughs, there are many new and existing technological and engineering problems. Substantially more work needs to do into having greater control of the electrons in graphene, which is essential for transistors, as well as developing greater understanding of the structure and properties of graphene.

Graphene-based transistors are in their infancy, making it difficult to judge if this technology is heading to revolutionise computer technology or the technological difficulties prove too great to overcome. Given the activity and fast paced nature of the field, the future for graphene-based transistors looks promising. If it became possible in the future to use graphene-based transistors in mainstream electronic devices, this would lead to a breakthrough in computer technology, making computers and phones much faster while using less power. Not only this, but with significantly more powerful computers many fields of research that rely on computing power, such as climate science, space exploration and finance, would make rapid progress. This would have an enormous effect on all aspects of society.

There are many possible applications of graphene including lightweight, thin display screens, solar cells, medical procedures, computing, improving chemical and industrial processes and environmental applications. It is an amazing material but time will tell if it fulfills expectations. There is currently ongoing research around to world into potential graphene applications, for example, in 2013 the EU made a 1 billion euro grant for exactly this purpose. Many developments in science and engineering are required before we are able to exploit the amazing properties of graphene. The future for graphene is uncertain; will it revolutionise science and computing or is this wonder material prove to good to be true?
