Gravitational wave discovery: a new way of observing the universe

7 August 2017

In 1915 Albert Einstein came up with the General Theory of Relativity, which is our current best theory of gravity. Over 100 years later, this theory continues to make extremely accurate calculations that affect our everyday life. For example, when using GPS, signals are sent to and from satellites to calculate your position to the nearest 10m, without general relativity this calculation would not be correct. General relativity also predicted the existence of gravitational waves. When massive objects accelerate they cause waves that radiate from the object distorting space, like water waves after a stone is dropped into a pond. These waves radiate at the speed of light. The universe is full of gravitational waves, but by the time they reach us they are minute and in almost all cases too small to detect.

Einstein’s prediction of gravitational waves from general relativity was found to be correct in 1974, with the study of a pair of extremely dense objects, called neutron stars. Neutron stars are the smallest and densest stars known to exist, and are formed from the collapsed core that remains after the supernova explosion of a massive star. These neutron stars were orbiting around each other under the force of gravity. Their orbits showed a gradual shift, as though they were losing energy, which exactly matched Einstein’s predictions of energy carried away from the system by gravitational waves. Although this supported the theory that gravitational waves exist, they were not directly detected for another three decades.

The first direct detection of gravitational waves came in September 2015, exactly 100 years after their prediction, by the LIGO experiment in the USA. Two massive, extremely dense objects called black holes spiralled towards each other and merged in an extremely high energy collision. This event radiated more energy than all the stars in the observable universe emitted in light during the same period of time and it took 1.3 billion years for the signal to reach us. When these gravitational waves reached Earth the spatial distortions were 100 times smaller than the nucleus of an atom. This makes their detection one of the most amazing scientific feats.

LIGO is the world’s largest gravitational wave observatory, consisting of two of the largest and most sensitive interferometers ever built, one in Hanford, Washington and the other in Livingston, Louisiana. 

What is an interferometer? An interferometer is an instrument that uses light to make measurements of tiny changes in distance. We can think of light as a wave, analogous to a water wave in the sea. If two large waves of similar height approach each other such that when they meet one is at its maximum height and the other at its minimum, they can ‘cancel out’ resulting in a much calmer sea. The same effect happens with light waves, two light waves can combine and result in no light at all. In the LIGO experiment, laser beams travel along two 2.4km long pipes at right angles to each other and bounce off mirrors at opposite ends of the pipes, return to where they started and combine to exactly cancel, i.e. no light is detected. Any small change in relative distance between the two arms of the instrument would cause a signal to be detected, as the waves would no longer exactly match up in order to completely cancel out. This setup is called an interferometer.

Gravitational waves cause tiny changes in spatial distances, 100 times smaller than the nucleus of an atom, which can be detected as a signal by the two LIGO interferometers. The key to detecting gravitational waves was the use of two interferometers at different places. Both instruments must detect the same signal at (almost) the same time for it to be due to gravitational waves. Incredible technological precision was needed to make this ground-breaking measurement.

A second detection followed soon afterwards in December 2015, followed by a third, more recently, in January 2017. Now we have direct evidence for gravitational waves, what next? This opens a whole new field of astronomy. Currently, astronomers observe the universe using light, which comes in many forms including visible light (the light that we use to observe the world around us), radio waves, microwaves and infrared, collectively known as electromagnetic waves. The detection of gravitational waves has opened up a whole new method of observation that we could not access before, as though we were deaf and have suddenly gained the ability to hear. This breakthrough will allow us to build up a much greater understanding of the history of the universe as well as to learn more about gravity, black holes and violent astrophysical events.
