Scientists find hints challenging our understanding of the universe

1 August 2017

How much do we really understand our world? The Standard Model (SM) is our current best theory of what makes up the universe and how matter interacts. It explains the world around us, from light and radioactivity to what holds everything together. The model defines 13 fundamental particles and makes predictions on how they interact with each other. Predictions from the SM have been verified to incredible precision, 1 part in 10 billion (equivalent to measuring the width of the USA to within the width of a human hair), making it the most precise theory in the history of science. Formulated in the mid-1970s, the theory continues to hold strong, as no measurements have been made so far that directly contradict the SM. Yet despite this, we know it to be an incomplete theory, for example it doesn’t include gravity. Particle physicists are looking to find any weaknesses with the SM in the hope of improving our model of the universe.

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva is the world’s most powerful particle accelerator; a 27km ring built 100m underground. Protons are accelerated close to the speed of light (travelling over 11,000 revolutions of the 27km ring per second) before colliding. Scientists working on the LHCb experiment, one of the four main experiments at the LHC, are constantly testing the SM, in more and more detail, to find its breaking point. Latest results from the LHCb experiment suggest we might be close.

So what do these latest results suggest? Electrons are fundamental particles in the SM and are present in atoms, which make up everything we see around us. In fact, electrons are part of a family of particles called leptons, which also contains the muon and tau particles. These are essentially heavier versions of the electron. Certain interactions of the electron, muon and tau are predicted to be the same in the SM - a principle known as lepton universality. Three different recent measurements from the LHCb experiment have shown suggestions that this principle may be false! Other experiments, BaBar in the USA and Belle in Japan, have made measurements that agree with those from LHCb. If confirmed, these results would expose a weakness of a model that has been unbreakable for decades.

But how can we determine whether these results are real or a result of random fluctuations in the data? The results contradict the SM with a significance of 2.2 to 2.6 sigma, which means that there is a 98.6 - 99.5% certainty that this is true. This may seem very high, but it is not high enough for scientists to celebrate just yet. Interesting results have in the past been more significant than this, but with more data were found to be a false alarm, such as the recent “diphoton excess” that generated a lot of excitement among physicists. What makes these results especially intriguing, is that the measurements, made by different people with different apparatus in different parts of the world, all agree with each other. Although these measurements individually may not be worth getting excited about, considered together they are promising and have attracted a lot of interest.

The importance of these results will become clearer after scientists analyse the second set of data from the LHC, which is currently being collected. These anomalies will either be confirmed or disappear with the addition of more data. Nevertheless, the latest results from LHCb have already caused excitement among particle physicists. Theorists are looking to come up with new ideas that could explain such results, such as new particles called leptoquarks, while experimentalists are busy improving on the current measurements with the latest LHC data.

Soon we will know whether this is a cruel statistical trick or an exciting new development that will challenge our understanding of the fundamental nature of the universe.
