Latest breakthrough towards a global quantum internet

29 September 2017

We understand how a ball travels when it is thrown, we can measure the speed and position of cars and calculate how a roller coaster moves. These objects are very easy to deal with. We know how they move and can easily measure their properties. Everything changes when we look at very small scales, and our simple understanding no longer applies. For example, the movement of a single particle such as electron cannot always be described like a ball. The study of physics at these tiny scales is called quantum mechanics. It often results in counterintuitive, ridiculous sounding situations. For example, it turns out we cannot know the speed and position of a particle at the same time, and by observing a system you change its properties. Two quantum particles can be created in such a way that their properties, described by their “quantum state”, are inextricably related. A measurement of one will instantaneously affect the other, however far apart the particles. This phenomenon is known as “entanglement” and is key in being able to transfer information over arbitrary distances using quantum particles: “quantum teleportation”.

If you’re bewildered by what you just read, don’t worry, you’re in very good company, Einstein thought entanglement so bizarre as to be impossible, ridiculing it as “spooky action at a distance” and Schrodinger developed his famous Schrodinger's cat paradox to illustrate the absurdity of quantum mechanics. However, since then these phenomena have been demonstrated experimentally and over the last 50 years the theory of quantum mechanics has perfectly described all observations at tiny scales. In the last decade there have been huge efforts worldwide to use these weird properties of quantum mechanics to perform otherwise impossible tasks, such as quantum teleportation. This phenomena was first experimentally observed in May 2014 over a distance of about 3 meters by a team of scientists in the Netherlands. Just over 3 years later the same phenomenon was observed from Earth to a satellite in space over a distance of up to 1400 km!

In June 2017 a group of scientists from China successfully quantum teleported photons from a ground observatory to a satellite in orbit around the Earth over a distance of up to 1400km. This smashed the record of about 100 km from previous experiments, which were limited by photons being lost due to interactions at the ground level. By using ground to space communication the photons can travel further as most of their path is through empty space. The setup involved a transmitter called Nagari on a Tibetan mountain range at an altitude of 5100m, and a receiver satellite called Miscus, launched into orbit in August 2016. The orbit allowed the satellite to be anywhere from 500 km away when directly overhead, to 1400 km at the horizon. The high altitude of the transmitter in Tibet meant a thinner atmosphere and so as little air as possible on the path to the satellite to reduce the loss of photons. Entangled photons were produced at a rate of about 4000 per second and one photon was kept on the ground while the other was sent to the satellite Miscus. By making specific measurements of the photons, it is possible to transfer the quantum information from a third photon on the ground to the entangled photon on the satellite. Out of the billions of entangled photon pairs produced, the quantum states of 911 photons were observed to have been successfully teleported.

To be clear, quantum teleportation does not involve physically transporting the particle from one place to another, but transferring and reconstructing information about the quantum state of the particle. The original particle that was teleported loses its initial quantum state, which has been transferred to the final particle. What about teleporting people? There are about 7x10<sup>27</sup> atoms in the human body. You would need to prepare 7x10<sup>27</sup> entangled atoms (preferably in the shape of a human) to allow all the information encoded in your body to be teleported to a new body. The new person would contain all the same quantum information as the original, but be made up of different atoms. What this means exactly, in terms of how much of “you” stays the same, is completely unknown. At the moment this idea from science fiction while theoretically possible is completely impractical.

So why do we care about quantum teleportation? A very exciting application would be to use it to provide a network for long distance communication. Although currently in its infancy, this breakthrough is a vital step towards a large scale quantum internet. This latest breakthrough, showing that information transfer using satellites is achievable, opens up the possibility for a worldwide network of communication using quantum technology. The current rate of information transfer shown in this experiment is too low to sustain practical communications, however it demonstrates the possibility of quantum communications on a global scale. What’s so good about a quantum internet? Any attempt to intercept communications would change the quantum states involved, making it impossible to interfere without it being instantly recognisable. This feature of quantum mechanics has prompted many to claim that such a quantum internet is “unhackable”. Whether this is true remains to be seen, but maybe in the not too distant future!
